>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, DECEMBER 11:
CONTINUED REACTIONS TO THE
C.I.A. ASSESSMENT THAT RUSSIAN
HACKERS TRIED TO INFLUENCE THE
U.S. PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
EXXON MOBIL C.E.O. REX TILLERSON
EMERGES AS THE FRONTRUNNER FOR
SECRETARY OF STATE.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
AMERICA'S FIRST OFFSHORE WIND
TURBINES.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE C.I.A. ASSESSMENT THAT
RUSSIAN HACKERS TRIED TO TILT
THE U.S. ELECTION IN FAVOR OF
DONALD TRUMP BY TARGETING
EMAILS FROM THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY
DREW FIRE FROM THE PRESIDENT-
ELECT HIMSELF.
MR. TRUMP BLASTED THE REPORTS
TODAY IN AN INTERVIEW ON FOX
NEWS SUNDAY.
>> I THINK IT'S RIDICULOUS, I
THINK IT'S JUST ANOTHER EXCUSE,
I DON'T BELIEVE IT.
I THINK THE DEMS ARE PUTTING IT
OUT BECAUSE THEY SUFFERED ONE OF
THE GREATEST DEFEATS IN THE
HISTORY OF THIS COUNTRY.
PERSONALLY IT COULD BE RUSSIA I
DON'T REALLY THINK IT IS BUT WHO
KNOWS?
>> Stewart:: DESPITE THE
PRESIDENT-ELECT'S SKEPTICISM,
VOICES ON CAPITOL HILL ARE
CALLING FOR A CONGRESSIONAL
INVESTIGATION.
A BIPARTISAN GROUP OF FOUR
SENATORS, INCLUDING JOHN McCAIN
AND CHUCK SCHUMER, RELEASED A
STATEMENT THIS MORNING SAYING:
>> DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS
MUST WORK TOGETHER, AND ACROSS
THE JURISDICTIONAL LINES OF THE
CONGRESS, TO EXAMINE THESE
RECENT INCIDENTS THOROUGHLY.
>> Stewart: SENATOR McCAIN LATER
SAID THAT THE SENATE ARMED
SERVICES COMMITTEE, WHICH HE
CHAIRS, WILL INVESTIGATE THE
ALLEGATIONS, AND THAT HE WOULD
LIKE TO FORM A SPECIAL COMMITTEE
TO LEARN MORE.
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE PAUL RYAN
ALSO RESPONDED TO THE REPORT
WITH A STATEMENT THAT SAID IN
PART, "FOREIGN INTERVENTION IN
OUR ELECTIONS IS UNACCEPTABLE,"
BUT SPEAKER RYAN DID NOT CALL
FOR AN INVESTIGATION.
THE REPORT OF RUSSIAN ATTEMPTS
TO INFLUENCE THE ELECTION IS
HIGHLIGHTING CONCERNS ABOUT
EXXON MOBIL CEO REX TILLERSON
SINCE HIS EMERGENCE AS A LATE
FRONTRUNNER TO BE SECRETARY OF
STATE.
THE OIL EXECUTIVE HAS LONG-TIME
TIES WITH RUSSIA AND PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN, WHO GAVE
TILLERSON AN "ORDER OF
FRIENDSHIP" HONOR IN 2013.
SENATOR MARCO RUBIO TWEETED
TODAY "BEING A ' ¡FRIEND OF
VLADIMIR' IS NOT AN ATTRIBUTE I
AM HOPING FOR FROM A SECRETARY
OF STATE."
MR. TRUMP BELIEVES TILLERSON'S
FAMILIARITY WITH PUTIN WOULD BE
AN ASSET.
>> HE'S MUCH MORE THAN A
BUSINESS EXECUTIVE; HE'S A
WORLD-CLASS PLAYER.
HE KNOWS MANY OF THE PLAYERS,
AND HE KNOWS THEM WELL.
HE DOES MASSIVE DEALS IN RUSSIA,
FOR THE COMPANY, NOT FOR
HIMSELF.
>> Stewart: BUT THE PRESIDENT-
ELECT SAID HE HAS NOT MADE A
FINAL DECISION, SAYING MITT
ROMNEY AND SENATOR BOB CORKER
ARE STILL CANDIDATES.
MR. TRUMP WEIGHED IN ON ANOTHER
FOREIGN POLICY ISSUE,
QUESTIONING THE LONG STANDING
"ONE CHINA" POLICY WHEN ASKED
ABOUT HIS CONTROVERSIAL PHONE
CALL WITH TAIWAN'S PRESIDENT.
>> I FULLY UNDERSTAND THE "ONE
CHINA" POLICY BUT I DON'T KNOW
WHY WE HAVE TO BE BOUND BY A
"ONE CHINA" POLICY UNLESS WE
MAKE A DEAL WITH CHINA.
>> Stewart: ON TUESDAY THE
FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD BEGINS A
TWO-DAY MEETING, ITS LAST FOR
2016, AND IT IS WIDELY
ANTICIPATED THAT FED CHAIR JANET
YELLEN WILL ANNOUNCE AN INTEREST
RATE INCREASE.
ALSO AT PLAY IS THE TRANSITION
FROM THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION TO
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION AND
WHAT THAT MIGHT MEAN FOR
MONETARY POLICY MOVING FORWARD.
JOINING ME FROM WASHINGTON DC
FOR SOME INSIGHT IS BINYAMIN
APPELBAUM OF THE NEW YORK TIMES.
>> THE FED HAS SIGNALED IT PLANS
TO RAISE INTEREST RATES.
WHY?
>> THEY'RE READY TO RAISE
INTEREST RATES FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN ALMOST A YEAR BECAUSE
THEY THINK THE ECONOMY IS DOING
BETTER.
WE'VE HAD SLOW BUT STEADY GROWTH
FOR QUITE SOME TIME NOW.
A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE FOUND JOBS,
THE UNG EMPLOYMENT RATE
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IS DOWN TO
4.6% AND THE FED THINKS THE
ECONOMY IS READY TO
SLIGHTLY HIGHER INTEREST RATES.
>> FED CHAIRMAN JANET YELLEN,
ITS ECONOMIC POLICY WHAT ARE
SOME OF THE UNKNOWNS OUT THERE?
>> YEAH, THAT'S RIGHT.
THIS IS SORT OF THE LAST FED
DECISION THAT PROBABLY WON'T BE
INFLUENCED BY DONALD TRUMP.
YOU KNOW IT REALITY HAS
COMPLICATED THE FED'S OUTLOOK.
THE FED WAS EXPECTING BEFORE THE
ELECTION THAT GROWTH WOULD
REMAIN SLOW AND STEADY AND THERE
IS NOW AT LEAST TWO OTHER
OPTIONS.
ONE THAT DONALD TRUMP AND
CONGRESSIONAL REPUBLICANS
SUCCEED IN PASSING LEGISLATION
SUCH AS TAX CUTS OR
SPENDING, THAT JOLTS US OUT OF
THE MALAISE THAT THE ECONOMY HAS
BEEN IN OR THE OTHER, THAT THE
ECONOMY TIPS BACKWARDS INTO
POTENTIALLY A RECESSION.
THE FED HAS TO BE MUCH MORE
MINDFUL OF BOTH OF THOSE
SITUATIONS.
THE DEGREE OF UNCERTAINTY HAS
INCREASED.
>> WHEN DONALD TRUMP WAS
CAMPAIGNING HE SAID HARSH WORDS
ABOUT THE FED ACCUSED IT BEING
POLITICAL AND TRYING TO KEEP
INTEREST RATES DOWN TO BENEFIT
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S LEGACY.
FOR THE RECORD LET'S FACT CHECK
THIS.
THE FED IS NOT A POLITICAL
ORGANIZATION, CORRECT?
>> THE FED IS AN INDEPENDENT
AGENCY.
ITS MEMBERS ARE CERTAINLY
APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT AND
CONFIRMED BY CONGRESS.
BUT THEY ARE INTENTIONALLY
INSULATED FROM SHORT TERM
POLITICAL PRESSURE AND THERE IS
NO EVIDENCE THAT ANY OF THEIR
DECISION MAKING IS THE RESULT OF
POLITICAL PRESSURE.
>> FED CHAIR JANET YELLEN SAID
SHE WITH WOULD STAY UNTIL THE
END OF HER TERM.
>> DONALD TRUMP WILL BE ABLE TO
FILL TWO SEATS, BUT
CONGRESSIONAL REPUBLICANS
REFUSED TO HOLD HEARINGS ON
THOSE NOMINATIONS SO THOSE TWO
VACANCIES ARE STILL THERE.
THE INTERESTING QUESTION IS WHO
HE WANTS ON THE FED.
YOU KNOW DONALD TRUMP IS BY
NATURE AND BY HIS LONG CAREER A
BORROWER.
THE KIND OF GUY WHO GENERALLY
WOULD BE THOUGHT TO FAVOR LOWER
INTEREST RATES.
HE NOW LEADS THE PARTY OF
LENDERS, THE REPUBLICAN PARTY,
WHICH HAS LONG THOUGHT THAT
FISCAL AND MONETARY POLICY
SHOULD BE A LITTLE BIT TIGHTER.
AND THAT WOULD TEND TO ARGUE FOR
THE TYPE OF GOVERNOR WHO MIGHT
WANT TO RAISE INTEREST RATES A
LITTLE MORE QUICKLY.
SO HOW THAT BALANCE PLAYS OUT
BETWEEN WHO DONALD TRUMP IS AS A
PERSON AND SOME OF THE POLITICAL
IMPERATIVES OF LEADING THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY IS GOING TO BE
VERY INTERESTING TO WATCH.
>> Stewart:
>>READ MORE ABOUT THE
CONTINUING PROTESTS AGAINST THE
SOUTH KOREAN PRESIDENT.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: WIND POWER IS A
TECHNOLOGY GRADUALLY HELPING
SOME PARTS OF THE UNITED STATES
REDUCE THEIR RELIANCE ON THE
FOSSIL FUELS THAT CONTRIBUTE TO
CLIMATE CHANGE.
SOMETIME IN THE COMING DAYS, A
TECHNICIAN IN RHODE ISLAND WILL
FLIP A SWITCH, AND A SOURCE OF
ELECTRIC POWER IN THE U.S. WILL
BEGIN A NEW ERA: HARNESSED
ENERGY FROM OFFSHORE WINDS.
RHODE ISLAND'S PROJECT IS SMALL,
BUT IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MIKE
TAIBBI REPORTS, IT COULD HAVE
LARGE IMPLICATIONS.
>> Reporter: AT GROUND LEVEL, IN
THEIR OUTSIZED ELEGANCE, THEY
LOOKED LIKE THE COMPONENTS OF
SOME FUTURISTIC SPACE COMPLEX.
BUT IN FACT THEY'RE THE BLADES
THAT WILL SPIN ATOP AMERICA'S
FIRST OFFSHORE WIND TURBINES.
THIS DEMONSTRATION PROJECT, A
DECADE IN THE MAKING, BORROWS
RENEWABLE ENERGY TECHNOLOGY FROM
LAND-BASED WIND FARMS AND TAKES
THAT TECHNOLOGY OUT TO SEA IN A
PATCH OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN OFF
TINY BLOCK ISLAND, RHODE ISLAND.
JEFF GRYBOWSKI IS THE CEO OF THE
COMPANY BEHIND THE PROJECT,
DEEPWATER WIND.
>> WE LIFT ALL THIS EQUIPMENT
ABOUT 450 FEET UP IN THE AIR AND
BOLT TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: AND THESE ARE,
LIKE, 25 TONS APIECE?
>> 29 TONS, EACH BLADE.
EACH IS ABOUT 241 FEET LONG.
>> Reporter: RHODE ISLAND
GOVERNOR GINA RAIMONDO CAME TO
THE PORT OF PROVIDENCE TO TAKE
A "VICTORY LAP."
>> IT MEANS A CLEANER SOURCE OF
ENERGY.
ULTIMATELY, IT MEANS A LOWER
COST OF ENERGY.
I LOVE THAT.
I LOVE IT WHEN RHODE ISLAND IS
THE FIRST.
>> Reporter: THE FIRST TO START
AN INDUSTRY IN THE U.S. THAT'S
ALREADY ESTABLISHED AND GROWING
IN EUROPE, WHERE SOME 3,000
OFFSHORE TURBINES SUPPLY POWER
FOR MORE THAN SEVEN MILLION
HOMES.
IN DENMARK, FOR EXAMPLE, AS
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND" REPORTED LAST
YEAR, OFFSHORE WIND TURBINES,
COMBINED WITH LAND-BASED
TURBINES ALREADY PROVIDE 40% OF
THE COUNTRY'S ELECTRICITY, AND
ARE TURNING TOWARD A GOAL OF 50%
BY 2020.
BY COMPARISON, IN THE U.S.
TODAY, WIND POWER ACCOUNTS FOR
ONLY ABOUT 5% OF ALL ELECTRICITY
GENERATION.
TO TAKE THIS STEP IN U.S.
WATERS, PLANTING A MERE FIVE
TURBINES ON THE SHALLOW
CONTINENTAL SHELF SOUTH OF BLOCK
ISLAND, DEEPWATER WIND HAD TO
OVERCOME SEVERAL COURT
CHALLENGES, OBTAIN STATE AND
FEDERAL PERMITS, AND BEAT BACK
ARGUMENTS THAT THE WINDMILLS ARE
AN EYESORE.
BLOCK ISLAND ONLY HAS ABOUT A
THOUSAND YEAR-ROUND RESIDENTS,
BUT TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
ADMIRERS, MOSTLY TOURISTS AND
SEASONAL VISITORS, FLOCK HERE IN
THE SUMMER.
ROSEMARIE IVES AND HER HUSBAND,
JONATHAN, OWN A HOME ON BLOCK
ISLAND AND HAVE BEEN SPENDING
THEIR SUMMERS HERE FOR DECADES.
>> INSTEAD OF ONE COMING TO THE
ISLAND AND LOOKING OUT AT THIS
WONDERFUL, AMAZING VIEW WHERE
THE OCEAN DOES RISE TO MEET THE
SKY, YOU'RE FOCUSED ON A MANMADE
INDUSTRIAL INSTALLATION AND I
DON'T LIKE IT.
>> Reporter: IT COST $300
MILLION TO BUILD THIS PROJECT,
ALL COMING FROM PRIVATE
INVESTMENT.
THOUGH DEEPWATER WIND IS ALSO
GETTING A FEDERAL TAX CREDIT.
BUT THERE IS UNCERTAINTY ABOUT
HOW MUCH THE ENERGY GENERATED
FROM THE WIND FARM WILL COST THE
RATEPAYERS WHO'LL USE THAT
ENERGY.
THE COMPANY THAT'S BUYING AND
DISTRIBUTING THE ELECTRICITY,
NATIONAL GRID, WILL PAY
DEEPWATER WIND A PRICE FOR THE
WIND FARM'S RENEWABLE ENERGY
THAT'S HIGHER THAN TODAY'S
MARKET PRICES FROM TRADITIONAL
SOURCES.
NATIONAL GRID SAYS THAT'S
BECAUSE...
AS PART OF THE DEAL, NATIONAL
GRID WILL BE PAYING
DEEPWATER WIND ANNUAL COST
INCREASES OF 3.5% EVERY YEAR,
FOR THE NEXT 20 YEARS.
CRITICS SAY THAT COULD RESULT IN
HIGHER ELECTRICITY BILLS FOR ALL
ONE MILLION RHODE ISLAND
RESIDENTS.
AL LUBRANO, WHO OWNS A HOME ON
BLOCK ISLAND, USED TO RUN A
MANUFACTURING TECH COMPANY ON
THE MAINLAND.
>> THIS IS GOING TO BE MUCH MORE
EXPENSIVE.
I WOULD LOVE TO START A COMPANY
WHERE THE STATE NOT ONLY
GUARANTEED ME ANNUAL INCREASES
IN WHAT I COULD CHARGE
CUSTOMERS, BUT ALSO GUARANTEED
ME PROFITABILITY.
AND THAT'S BASICALLY WHAT
HAPPENED HERE.
>> I DON'T THINK ANYBODY HAS A
PROBLEM WITH MAKING INVESTMENTS
IN R & D AND RENEWABLES, WHETHER
IT'S SOLAR, WIND, OR SOMETHING
ELSE THAT'S OUT THERE.
>> Reporter: I HEAR THE "BUT."
>> HOWEVER, IF YOU ASK THE
PUBLIC DO THEY WANT TO PAY 100%
MORE OR DO THEY WANT TO PAY 300%
MORE, I THINK THEY WOULD SAY
"HELL NO!"
>> Reporter: WHILE THE RATES
ALMOST CERTAINLY WILL RISE
ACROSS RHODE ISLAND, MOST YEAR-
ROUND BLOCK ISLAND RESIDENTS
DON'T BELIEVE THEIR ELECTRICITY
BILLS WILL RISE THAT MUCH.
THAT'S IN LARGE PART BECAUSE THE
ISLAND ALREADY PAYS SOME OF THE
HIGHEST ELECTRICITY RATES IN THE
COUNTRY BECAUSE IT DEPENDS FOR
ALL ITS POWER ON SHIPLOADS OF
FUEL OIL FROM THE MAINLAND AND
AN OLD INEFFICIENT DIESEL POWER
PLANT.
IN TOUGH TIMES, AS WHEN OIL
PRICES SOARED TO WELL OVER $100
A BARREL IN RECENT YEARS,
ISLANDERS HAVE ENDURED ELECTRIC
BILLS DOUBLE OR TRIPLE THE
NATIONAL AVERAGE.
IN BETTER TIMES, RIGHT NOW, FOR
EXAMPLE, WITH OIL PRICES WAY,
WAY DOWN, DEEPWATER WIND'S
PROJECT NOT ONLY POWERS BLOCK
ISLAND BUT ALSO INCLUDES A 20
MILE CABLE TO CARRY THE EXCESS
ENERGY ITS TURBINES PRODUCE
STRAIGHT INTO THE MAINLAND
ELECTRIC GRID.
THAT'S STABILITY, SAYS THE
ISLAND'S FORMER TOWN COUNCIL
LEADER KIM GAFFETT.
>> EVEN IF THE COST OF FUEL
COMES SO LOW THAT THE SAVINGS
ARE FLAT, WE HAVE NO SAVINGS, IT
JUST COSTS THE SAME, SO WHAT?
WE END UP WITH RENEWABLE ENERGY.
WE END UP WITH A STABLE COST.
IT'S NOT GOING TO FLUCTUATE
MONTH TO MONTH.
>> Reporter: THE WINDS HERE ARE
STEADY AND DEPENDABLE.
BUT WITH OTHER LARGE SCALE
PROPOSALS TO EXPLOIT THOSE WINDS
REJECTED OR STALLED UP AND DOWN
THE EAST COAST, DEEPWATER AND
GRYBOWSKI MADE A STRATEGIC
DECISION EIGHT YEARS AGO:
INSTEAD OF TRYING FOR THE MUCH
LARGER WIND FARM, THEY WENT FOR
A MERE DEMONSTRATION PROJECT:
JUST THIRTY MEGAWATTS OF POWER
FROM THESE FIVE TURBINES.
>> THAT REALLY WAS A FOCUS OF
OUR COMPANY'S PHILOSOPHY ON HOW
TO BUILD THIS INDUSTRY UP.
LET'S START WITH SOMETHING SMALL
THAT'S MANAGEABLE, WHERE WE CAN
CONTROL THE RISK.
AND LET'S GRADUALLY MAKE THESE
PROJECTS LARGER AND LARGER TO
THE POINT WHERE WE CAN
EVENTUALLY DO REALLY UTILITY-
SCALE STUFF.
>> Reporter: BOTTOM LINE,
THEY'RE HERE.
AND WIND POWER DREAMERS ALL
ALONG THE 12 THOUSAND MILES OF
CONTINENTAL U.S. COASTLINE:
THE ATLANTIC, THE GULF COAST,
THE PACIFIC, ARE LOOKING AT
LITTLE RHODE ISLAND AND SAYING,
"IT'S ON!"
>> I THINK IT'S THE BEGINNING OF
SOMETHING REALLY BIG.
IT'S A PILOT, BUT IT'S THE
BEGINNING OF AN INDUSTRY, AND
NOW WE'RE STARTING TO HEAR FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, HEAR FROM NEW
YORK, HEAR FROM OUR NEIGHBORS.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, THE
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR OF
MASSACHUSETTS, CHARLIE BAKER,
HAS SIGNED LEGISLATION PAVING
THE WAY FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF
ENOUGH OFFSHORE WIND GENERATION
TO POWER ABOUT HALF A MILLION
HOMES.
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, IN
CALIFORNIA, A VETERAN ENGINEER
NAMED ALLA WEINSTEIN SALUTED
RHODE ISLAND AND SAID SUCCESS
THERE MAKES HER OWN PROPOSAL FOR
FLOATING TURBINES ANCHORED IN
DEEPER PACIFIC WATERS MUCH MORE
DOABLE.
>> JUST TO GET TO THE POINT OF
FLIPPING THE SWITCH AND GETTING
ENERGY FROM OFFSHORE WIND IS
GOING TO BE A SIGNIFICANT EVENT.
I CAN POINT AND SAY, HERE, WE DO
HAVE IT IN THE UNITED STATES!
>> Reporter: WEINSTEIN'S
COMPANY, TRIDENT WINDS, HOPES TO
PLANT 100 FLOATING TURBINES,
BASED ON PROTOTYPES TESTED AND
MANUFACTURED OVERSEAS, IN THE
DEEP WATERS OFF MORRO BAY, JUST
DOWN THE WEST COAST FROM BIG SUR
AND HEARST CASTLE.
THE TURBINES, ESSENTIALLY SHIPS
WITH TOWERS AND BLADES ALL
TURNING WITH THE WIND 20 TO 30
MILES OFFSHORE, WOULD BE PINNED
TO THE OCEAN FLOOR BY MASSIVE
ANCHORS.
FLOATING TURBINES CAN BE FULLY
ASSEMBLED ON LAND RATHER THAN
OUT AT SEA, MAKING THE
PRODUCTION PROCESS MORE
EFFICIENT AND SCALABLE.
>> YOU BASICALLY PRE-FABRICATE
ALL THE PIECES AHEAD OF TIME AND
THEN YOU HAVE A SERIAL
PRODUCTION LINE WHERE YOU
ASSEMBLE THEM ALL TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: MASS PRODUCTION?
>> EXACTLY!
>> Reporter: BUT WHILE THE
ESTIMATED COST OF THE PROJECT IS
$3.5 TO 4 BILLION, WEINSTEIN
SAYS THAT'S NO MORE THAN THE
COST OF A NEW OIL, COAL OR
NUCLEAR POWER PLANT.
>> IT HAS TO WORK ECONOMICALLY.
IT'S A BALANCING ACT AGAIN OF
LOOKING AT THE MARKET, LOOKING
AT THE DEMAND, LOOKING AT THE
TIME IT'S GOING TO TAKE YOU TO
PERMIT A PROJECT OF THIS SORT,
AND DOING IT AT THE RIGHT TIME.
>> Reporter: 200 MILES EAST OF
MORRO BAY, THE TECHNICIANS
TENDING TO ONE OF THE WORLD'S
LARGEST LAND-BASED WIND FARMS,
THE MOJAVE WIND FARM IN THE
TEHACHAPI PASS, SAY IT IS THE
RIGHT TIME FOR OFFSHORE WIND,
AND THE BLOCK ISLAND PILOT
PROJECT IS THE TRIGGER.
NEAL EMMERTON MONITORS THE
TURBINES OWNED BY THE COMPANY
EVERPOWER.
>> I THINK IT'S TREMENDOUS.
IT'S HUGE.
IT'S NOTHING IF YOU'RE FROM
EUROPE, BECAUSE THEY'VE HAD THEM
OUT IN THE WATER FOR 15, 20
YEARS BUT HERE IN THE UNITED
STATES, IT IS.
THE FIRST ONE TO DO IT IS ALSO
THE MOST EXPENSIVE, BUT ONCE
IT'S BEEN DONE THE COSTS ARE
GOING TO DROP LIKE THE CRAZY,
AND THEN IT GETS TO BE COST
COMPETITIVE.
>> Reporter: THAT'S WHAT
HAPPENED WITH LAND-BASED WIND
POWER: THE OLDEST TURBINES HERE
THAT GO BACK 20 AND 30 YEARS
WERE SMALL AND INEFFICIENT, BY
TODAY'S STANDARDS, THEIR USEFUL
LIFE MOSTLY OVER.
TODAY, THE WILD MUSTANGS THAT
HAVE ROAMED THESE VAST ACRES FOR
GENERATIONS PICK THEIR WAY AMONG
MORE THAN 5,000 MODERN TOWERS
WITH SPACE-AGE BLADES CAPABLE OF
SWEEPING MORE USABLE ENERGY FROM
THE STEADY WINDS THAN EVER
BEFORE.
RIGHT NOW, WIND PROVIDES ABOUT
8% OF CALIFORNIA'S ENERGY NEEDS.
BUT TO MEET THE TARGET OF 50%
RENEWABLE ENERGY BY THE YEAR
2030, WIND IS GOING TO HAVE TO
DO A LOT BETTER THAN THAT.
SO ALLA WEINSTEIN SEES HER
PROPOSAL FOR FLOATING OFFSHORE
>> IF WE DON'T INNOVATE, IF WE
DON'T LOOK BEYOND THE HORIZON,
IF WE DON'T TAKE THE RISKS,
WE'LL NOT BE ADVANCING.
>> Reporter: BACK IN RHODE
ISLAND, SOME RESIDENTS, LIKE AL
LUBRANO AND ROSEMARY IVES,
REMAIN SKEPTICAL HOW MUCH THOSE
ADVANCES WILL COST THEM AND
THEIR VIEW.
BUT JEFF GRYBOWSKI THINKS HIS
COMPANY HAS HARNESSED THE WIND
IN A WAY THAT WAS INEVITABLE.
>> IT IS AWE-INSPIRING. IT'S
REMARKABLE THAT WE'RE ACTUALLY
HERE AT THIS MOMENT. IT'S
ACTUALLY GOING VERY FAST NOW.
THAT'S WHAT REALLY STRIKES ME,
HOW QUICKLY IT'S GOING.
>> Stewart: HERE IN NEW YORK,"
NOT THAT JEWISH" IS THE TITLE
OF A NEW ONE-WOMAN, OFF-BROADWAY
SHOW THAT FEATURES A COMEDIAN
GRAPPLING WITH HER CULTURAL
UPBRINGING, HER CAREER, AND LIFE
AS A SINGLE MOM.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER RECENTLY SAT DOWN WITH
THE SHOW'S WRITER AND STAR.
>> THIS WAS US.
WE WERE SUNS OF THE SUNSET.
THERE'S ROBIN THERE.
>> Reporter: WHETHER PERFORMING
WITH A YOUNG ROBIN WILLIAMS,
TOURING WITH JERRY SEINFELD OR
WRITING FOR SUCH SHOWS AS
"ROSEANNE" OR NICKELODEON'S
RUGRATS, MONICA PIPER HAS WORKED
IN NEARLY EVERY CORNER OF
COMEDY.
>> THE GREAT THING ABOUT STAND-
UP AS OPPOSED TO ALMOST OTHER
ART IS THAT YOU KNOW IMMEDIATELY
WHETHER IT'S GOOD OR NOT.
>> Reporter: BUT AFTER NEARLY 40
YEARS MAKING PEOPLE LAUGH, THE
BRONX RAISED PIPER HAS LENT HER
COMEDIC PEN TO A ONE WOMAN, OFF
BROADWAY SHOW CALLED "NOT THAT
JEWISH."
>> SPILKUS AND HE LOOKS LIKE A
SFAGOGONER, IF YOU KNOW WHAT I
MEAN.
I HAD NO IDEA WHAT SHE MEANT.
TO MAKE PEOPLE LAUGH--
SEINFELD SAID IT'S POWERFUL AND
ADDICTING, AND IT IS, BUT TO SEE
THEM LAUGHING IN THIS BROADER
CONTEXT IS A WHOLE NEW THING.
>> Reporter: PERFORMING IN NEW
YORK'S NEW WORLD STAGES, PIPER
CHRONICLES NOT ONLY THE ORIGINS
OF HER LIFE IN COMEDY, BUT HER
QUEST TO UNDERSTAND WHAT IT
MEANS TO BE A JEWISH AMERICAN
WOMAN.
>> WHEN I WAS GROWING UP WE
DIDN'T BELONG TO A TEMPLE, BUT
ON THE HIGH HOLY DAYS ME MOTHER
WOULD MAKE US DRESS UP AND STAND
IN FRONT OF THE APARTMENT
BUILDING SO IT LOOKED LIKE WE
JUST GOT HOME FROM TEMPLE.
I WAS VERY DETERMINED FOR THIS
TO REALLY BE A PLAY AND NOT JUST
STAND-UP WITH FURNITURE.
>> Reporter: WHILE THE SHOW IS
THREADED WITH SOME OF THE SAME
JOKES THAT CARRIED HER COMEDY
ROUTINE, PIPER TAKES THE
AUDIENCE THROUGH FAILED
ROMANCES, THE DEATH OF HER
PARENTS AND HER LIFE AS A SINGLE
MOM TO AN ADOPTED SON.
>> SO IF I TALK ABOUT THE MEN
THAT I'M MEETING, WHICH IN
STAND-UP WOULD BE, "THEN I WENT
OUT WITH THIS GUY."
BUT THIS NOW HAS MEANING IN A
GREATER SENSE.
>> Reporter: IS THAT FRIGHTENING
TO NOT ONLY CHANGE THE FORMAT,
BUT ALSO TO CHANGE THE FORMAT IN
A WAY THAT YOU'RE REVEALING SO
MUCH MORE ABOUT YOURSELF?
>> NO, I WOULD NOT SAY IT'S
FRIGHTENING.
I WOULD SAY IT'S REALLY FREEING.
>> Reporter: WITHIN THIS
FREEDOM, PIPER BARES ALL.
HER REVELATIONS THAT HER
MARRIAGE IS OVER, A BATTLE WITH
BREAST CANCER AND HER STRUGGLES
TO RAISE AN ADOPTED SON BORN OF
CHRISTIAN MOTHER TO BE A JEWISH
MAN.
>> I SCUD ASKED HOW SHE FELT
ABOUT ME RAISING HIM JEWISH, SHE
TOOK A BEAT AND SAID, SO NO
JESUS?
WELL, NOT ENTIRELY.
I'M SURE IF I STUBBED MY TOE OR
SOMETHING --
(LAUGHTER)
>> JESUS!
>> Reporter: PIPER TRACES MUCH
OF HER COMEDIC INSTINCTS TO HER
FATHER, WHO, IN HIS EARLY YEARS,
ALSO WORKED AS A COMEDIAN.
ULTIMATELY, THE UNDERTOW OF THE
ENTIRE PLAY COMES BY WAY OF
PIPER'S REVELATION THAT THIS
COMEDIC INSTINCT HAS NOT ONLY
PASSED DOWN FROM HER FATHER TO
HER, BUT ONWARD TO HER SON JAKE.
>> THERE'S A LINE IN THE PLAY
EARLIER, RIGHT BEFORE HIS BAR
MITZVAH, WHEN I SAY TO MY
FATHER, "THIS IS CRAZY.
EVERY TIME I TURN AROUND, IT'S
$1,000."
MY FATHER SAYS, "DON'T TURN
AROUND."
THAT'S MY FATHER.
SO I TELL JAKE THAT, AND HE
LAUGHS.
NOW, THAT WAS WHEN HE WAS 13.
NOW HE'S 18 TELLING ME HE'S NOT
JEWISH AND I'M DOING THE DISHES,
AND HE COMES IN THE KITCHEN.
AND I SAY, "THIS IS
UNBELIEVABLE, EVERY TIME I TURN
AROUND, THERE'S ANOTHER DISH IN
THE SINK."
HE SAYS, "DON'T TURN AROUND."
AND WE DON'T EVEN SAY ANYTHING,
WE JUST LOOK AT EACH OTHER, THE
HUMOR, THE SPIRIT, THE-- HIS
GRANDPA'S WORDS.
>> I'D SPEAK TO MY FATHER ON THE
PHONE, HEY DAD GUESS WHAT I'M
DATING A NEW GUY, THAT'S GREAT.
DON'T BE BOSSY.
I AM NOT BOSSY.
YOU ARE, YOU JUST DON'T KNOW YOU
ARE.
FINE CAN WE PLEASE CHANGE THE
SUBJECT?
ABSOLUTELY.
HOW'S THE ACTING?
ARE YOU ANY GOOD?
YEAH.
I THINK I'M REALLY GOOD.
THAT'S TERRIFIC!
NEXT TIME YOU'RE OUT WITH A GUY,
PLAY THE PART OF SOMEONE WHO
ISN'T BOSSY.
(LAUGHTER)
>> THAT'S WHAT I LOVE ABOUT THE
PLAY.
THE FIRST THIRD, NOT EVEN, IS MY
CHILDHOOD AND MY RELATIONSHIP
WITH MY FATHER, MY FATHER BEING
FUNNY.
THEN ME BEING FUNNY.
AND NOW MY SON BEING FUNNY.
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE PASSING DOWN,
YOU KNOW.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY.
>> Stewart: CAMPAIGN 2016 IS
NOW OFFICIALLY OVER.
REPUBLICAN STATE TREASURER JOHN
KENNEDY DEFEATED DEMOCRAT FOSTER
CAMPBELL IN YESTERDAY'S RUN-OFF
ELECTION FOR THE U.S. SENATE IN
LOUISIANA.
KENNEDY'S VICTORY GIVES THE
REPUBLICANS A 52-TO-48 EDGE IN
THE SENATE WHEN THE NEW CONGRESS
CONVENES NEXT MONTH.
REPUBLICANS ALSO DEFEATED
DEMOCRATIC RIVALS TO WIN TWO
OPEN U.S. HOUSE SEATS.
OUTGOING U.S. DEFENSE SECRETARY
ASH CARTER MADE A SURPRISE VISIT
TO IRAQ TODAY TO MEET WITH PRIME
MINISTER HAIDER AL-ABADI AND
ASSESS THE ON-GOING BATTLE TO
RETAKE MOSUL FROM ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS.
IRAQI TROOPS ASSISTED BY U.S.
FORCES HAVE BEEN MAKING SLOW
PROGRESS IN THEIR ALMOST TWO-
MONTH OLD OFFENSIVE.
CARTER SAID HE REMAINS CONFIDENT
THAT, "ISIS' DAYS IN MOSUL ARE
NUMBERED."
TURKEY DECLARED A DAY OF
MOURNING TODAY FOR THE VICTIMS
OF LAST NIGHT'S TWIN BOMBINGS
OUTSIDE A SOCCER STADIUM IN
ISTANBUL.
AT LEAST 38 PEOPLE WERE KILLED
AND MORE THAN 150 WOUNDED.
MOST OF THE DEAD WERE POLICE
OFFICERS.
AN OFF-SHOOT OF THE OUTLAWED
KURDISTAN WORKERS PARTY CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE TWO
BOMBINGS WHICH HAPPENED LESS
THAN A MINUTE APART.
IN EGYPT, A BOMB EXPLODED DURING
SUNDAY MASS INSIDE A CHAPEL
NEXT TO CAIRO'S LARGEST COPTIC
CHRISTIAN CATHEDRAL, AND
OFFICIALS SAY AT LEAST 25 PEOPLE
WERE KILLED; SIX OF THEM
CHILDREN.
ALMOST FIFTY PEOPLE WERE
INJURED.
THERE HAS BEEN NO CLAIM OF
RESPONSIBILITY, BUT ISLAMIC
STATE MILITANTS ARE SUSPECTED.
IT WAS THE DEADLIEST ATTACK IN
YEARS ON MEMBERS OF EGYPT'S
COPTIC CHRISTIAN MINORITY.
THE DEATH TOLL IS EXPECTED TO
RISE FROM A HORRIFIC DISASTER IN
NIGERIA WHERE THE ROOF OF A
CHURCH COLLAPSED ON WORSHIPERS
DURING A SERVICE YESTERDAY.
TODAY THE HOSPITAL DIRECTOR IN
THE CITY OF UYO SAID AT LEAST
160 PEOPLE WERE KILLED AFTER THE
ROOF SUDDENLY GAVE WAY.
SOME SURVIVORS SAID WORKERS HAD
BEEN RUSHING TO FINISH
CONSTRUCTION OF THE CHURCH.
AND FINALLY TONIGHT, THE
WORLD'S LONGEST TUNNEL OPENED
FOR BUSINESS TODAY IN
SWITZERLAND WHEN A PASSENGER
TRAIN MADE THE TRIP FROM ZURICH
TO LUGANO.
THE TUNNEL UNDER THE SWISS ALPS
IS 35 MILES LONG.
IT TOOK 17 YEARS TO BUILD AND
COST ALMOST $12 BILLION.
TRAINS WILL EVENTUALLY TRAVEL
THROUGH THE TUNNEL AT MORE THAN
150 MILES AN HOUR.
THAT'S IT FOR PBS NewsHOUR
WEEKEND, I'M ALISON STEWART,
THANKS FOR WATCHING.